MAHABHARATA
Book 1 — The Adi Parva (Book of Origins)
Translated by Kisari Mohan Ganguli

1. Once, the great sage Vyasa, son of Satyavati, composed this great work called the Mahabharata, containing the entire knowledge of the Vedas, and the histories of the royal dynasties of Bharata.

2. This is the story of the Pandavas and the Kauravas, the sons of two brothers — Pandu and Dhritarashtra — who were themselves the sons of Vichitravirya, king of Hastinapura.

3. Pandu became king first, for Dhritarashtra was born blind and could not rule. Pandu was a great warrior king who conquered many lands and brought prosperity to his kingdom.

4. Pandu had two wives: Kunti and Madri. Kunti was given a divine boon by the sage Durvasa — she could call upon any god to father her children.

5. Through this boon, Kunti bore three sons: Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, the god of righteousness; Bhima, the son of Vayu, the god of wind; and Arjuna, the son of Indra, the king of the gods.

6. When Arjuna was born, a divine voice spoke from the heavens: This child shall surpass in might even Kartavirya and Shiva. This child shall spread the fame of the Kurus.

7. Madri bore twin sons Nakula and Sahadeva, sons of the divine Ashvini twins, the physicians of the gods. These were the five Pandavas.

8. But Pandu died while still young, cursed by a sage. The five Pandavas were raised by their mother Kunti in the forest, and later came to the court of Hastinapura.

9. Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons, the Kauravas, of whom Duryodhana was the eldest and most powerful. From their childhood, there was great rivalry between the Pandavas and the Kauravas.

10. The teacher of both the Pandavas and the Kauravas was the great Drona, a brahmin warrior of supreme skill. Under Drona's teaching, all the princes became great warriors.

11. But Arjuna was Drona's favourite pupil. One day, Drona set a test for all his students — he placed a wooden bird in a tree and asked each student to aim their arrow at its eye.

12. When asked what they saw, each student described the bird, the tree, and the sky. But Arjuna said he saw only the eye of the bird. This was the mark of a supreme archer.

13. Drona embraced Arjuna and declared that there would be no archer in the world equal to Arjuna, his beloved student.

14. Draupadi, the daughter of King Drupada, became the wife of all five Pandavas after the great swayamvara. At this gathering of kings, only Arjuna could string the mighty bow and hit the rotating fish target by looking at its reflection in water.

15. The Pandavas received half the kingdom and built the beautiful city of Indraprastha on what had been a wasteland. Under Yudhishthira's righteous rule, the city became prosperous and glorious.

16. Arjuna obtained the divine bow Gandiva from Agni, the fire god, and also received the Devadatta conch shell, which he would blow at the start of the great battle at Kurukshetra.