1. After the thirteen years of exile, the Pandavas sent their ambassador Drupada's priest to Dhritarashtra demanding the return of their kingdom as agreed.
2. Duryodhana flatly refused and declared that he would not give the Pandavas even as much land as could be covered by the point of a needle.
3. Both sides began preparing for war. The kingdoms and kings of the earth chose their sides. Some went with the Pandavas, some with the Kauravas.
4. Krishna himself went to Hastinapura as the Pandavas' ambassador for peace. He told Dhritarashtra that if the Pandavas were given even five villages, war could be avoided.
5. Dhritarashtra was willing to make peace, but Duryodhana refused any compromise and even tried to have Krishna arrested, thinking to capture him.
6. Krishna revealed his divine form in the assembly hall, blazing with divine light, and the assembled kings were struck with awe and terror.
7. Seeing that peace was impossible, both sides marshaled their armies on the great plain of Kurukshetra. The Pandava army was commanded first by Dhrishtadyumna.
8. Both Duryodhana and Arjuna went to Krishna to ask for his help. Duryodhana arrived first and sat at the head of Krishna's couch. Arjuna arrived later and sat at Krishna's feet.
9. Krishna gave them a choice: they could have his entire army of Narayanas on one side, or they could have Krishna himself, unarmed, on the other side. Arjuna immediately chose Krishna as his charioteer.
10. Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kurus, was appointed as commander of the Kaurava forces for the first ten days of battle.
11. On the first day of battle, as the two armies stood arrayed against each other, Arjuna asked Krishna to drive his chariot between the two armies so he could see who he must fight.
12. Seeing his own kinsmen — grandfather Bhishma, teacher Drona, uncles, cousins, and friends — arrayed against him, Arjuna was overwhelmed with grief and despair.
13. His bow Gandiva slipped from his hands, his limbs trembled, and he told Krishna he could not fight. It was at this moment that Krishna began to speak the immortal wisdom of the Bhagavad Gita.
14. After receiving the divine teachings of the Gita, Arjuna was filled with resolve and determination. He took up his bow and prepared to fight.
15. For eighteen days the great battle raged on the plain of Kurukshetra. Heroes fell on both sides. The earth was soaked with blood.
16. On the tenth day Bhishma, pierced with arrows by Arjuna and laid on a bed of arrows, fell from his chariot but did not die, for he had the boon of choosing the time of his death.
17. After Bhishma fell, Drona was made commander of the Kaurava forces. Under Drona's command, the Pandava army suffered greatly.
18. When Drona heard the false news that his son Ashwatthama had been killed, he laid down his weapons in grief. At that moment he was killed by Dhrishtadyumna.
19. Karna then became commander of the Kaurava forces. The battle between Karna and Arjuna was the most fearsome duel of the entire war.
20. During their battle, the wheel of Karna's chariot sank into the ground. Remembering the curse of his teacher Parashurama, Karna forgot the mantras needed to invoke his most powerful weapon.
21. As Karna stood defenseless trying to lift his chariot wheel from the earth, Arjuna shot him down with a divine arrow. Thus did the curse of Parashurama come true.
22. After Karna fell, Shalya was made commander. He was killed by Yudhishthira. The Kaurava army was virtually destroyed.
23. With his entire army destroyed, Duryodhana fled and hid in a lake. The Pandavas found him and Bhima challenged him to single combat with maces.
24. In the mace fight, Bhima struck Duryodhana on the thigh, a blow that was against the rules of fair combat, but which Bhima had sworn to deliver as revenge for Duryodhana's insult to Draupadi.
25. Duryodhana fell mortally wounded. The remaining Kaurava warriors — Ashwatthama, Kripacharya, and Kritavarma — swore revenge.
26. That night, Ashwatthama entered the sleeping Pandava camp and killed all the sons of Draupadi, mistaking them for the Pandava brothers who were sleeping elsewhere.
27. When the Pandavas discovered this, Arjuna swore to kill Ashwatthama. A terrible battle of divine weapons followed. The sage Vyasa and Krishna intervened and stopped the fight.
28. Ashwatthama was punished by being forced to wander the earth for three thousand years, unable to die, marked with an eternal wound on his forehead.
29. After the battle, the Pandavas performed the last rites for all the fallen warriors. Yudhishthira grieved deeply for all those who had died.
30. Yudhishthira was crowned king of Hastinapura. He performed the great Ashvamedha sacrifice to atone for the sins of the war.
31. The old blind king Dhritarashtra lived with the Pandavas in Hastinapura for fifteen years, then went to the forest with Gandhari and Kunti to spend his last days in penance.
32. Thirty-six years after the war, Krishna departed from the world. The age of the Kali Yuga began.
33. The Pandavas, knowing that their time on earth was ending, installed Arjuna's grandson Parikshit as king and set out on the great final journey called the Mahaprasthanika, the great departure.
34. One by one the brothers fell on the journey — first Draupadi, then Sahadeva, then Nakula, then Arjuna, then Bhima. Only Yudhishthira and a faithful dog remained.
35. The god Indra came in a divine chariot and asked Yudhishthira to ascend to heaven. Yudhishthira refused to leave the dog.
36. The dog then revealed himself to be Yama, the god of death and justice, who was Yudhishthira's divine father. He was testing his son's virtue.
37. Yudhishthira was taken to heaven, where he saw Duryodhana seated in glory. He also saw his brothers and Draupadi suffering in hell. But this was only an illusion to test him.
38. After bathing in the divine river, Yudhishthira shed his earthly body and was reunited with his brothers and Draupadi in the celestial realm, where they all shone with divine light.
39. Thus ends the Mahabharata, the greatest story ever told, the story of dharma and adharma, of righteous war, of divine wisdom, and of the ultimate triumph of truth over falsehood.