THE BHAGAVAD GITA
The Song of God — Translated by Sir Edwin Arnold

=== Chapter 1: The Distress of Arjuna ===

1. Dhritarashtra spoke: In the field of virtue, in the field of Kuru, when my people and the Pandavas had met together eager for battle, what did they, O Sanjaya?

2. Sanjaya replied: Having seen the army of the Pandavas drawn up in battle array, King Duryodhana then approached his teacher Drona, and spoke these words.

3. Behold, O Master, this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, arrayed by the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple.

4. Here are heroes, mighty archers, equal in battle to Bhima and Arjuna — Yuyudhana, Virata, and Drupada, the mighty car-warrior.

5. Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, the valiant King of Kashi, Purujit and Kuntibhoja, and Saibya, the bull among men.

6. Yudhamanyu the strong, and Uttamauja the brave; the son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi; all of them certainly great car-warriors.

7. Know also, O best of the twice-born, the leaders of my army. For thy information I will name them.

8. Thyself and Bhishma, and Karna, and Kripa, the ever victorious in battle; Asvatthama, Vikarna, and the son of Somadatta also.

9. And many other heroes who have given up their lives for my sake, armed with various weapons, all skilled in warfare.

10. Insufficient is that army of ours which is guarded by Bhishma; but sufficient is this army of theirs which is guarded by Bhima.

11. Therefore, all ye standing in your respective positions in the several divisions of the army, guard ye Bhishma, each one of you.

12. Then the eldest of the Kurus, the great-spirited grandsire Bhishma, cheering Duryodhana, sounded aloud a lion's roar, and blew his conch.

13. Thereafter, conchs and kettle-drums, tabors, drums, and cow-horns suddenly blared forth, and the sound was tremendous.

14. Then also, Madhava and the son of Pandu, standing in their magnificent chariot yoked with white horses, blew their divine conchs.

15. Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya, Dhananjaya blew the Devadatta, and Vrikodara of terrible deeds blew the great conch Paundra.

=== Chapter 2: Sankhya Yoga — The Way of Knowledge ===

1. Sanjaya said: To him who was thus overwhelmed with pity, whose eyes were full of tears and agitated, who was overwhelmed with grief, the destroyer of Madhu spoke these words.

2. The Blessed Lord said: Whence, in this crisis, has come upon thee, O Arjuna, this depression, this unmanliness? It ill beseems thee. Yield not to impotence, O Arjuna. It does not befit thee.

3. Yield not to unmanliness, O son of Pritha. It does not become thee. Shake off thy faint-heartedness and arise, O scorcher of enemies.

4. Arjuna said: How shall I strike Bhishma and Drona in battle with arrows, O Madhusudana? They are worthy of worship, O destroyer of foes.

5. Better it is, indeed, in this world to eat even the food of beggars than to slay these great-souled teachers. But if I kill them, even in this world all my enjoyments of wealth and desires will be smeared with blood.

6. Nor do I know which is greater for us — that we should conquer them or that they should conquer us. Even the sons of Dhritarashtra, whom if we kill we would not wish to live, stand facing us.

7. My heart is overpowered by the taint of pity; my mind is confused as to duty. I ask Thee. Tell me decisively what is good for me. I am Thy disciple. Instruct me who has taken refuge in Thee.

8. I see nothing that will drive away this grief which dries up my senses, even if I should obtain rich and unrivalled kingdom on earth, or even the sovereignty of the gods.

9. Sanjaya said: Having thus addressed Hrishikesha, the mighty Arjuna said to Krishna, I will not fight, and became silent.

10. O Bharata, Hrishikesha smiling, as it were, between the two armies, addressed the dejected one with these words.

11. The Blessed Lord said: Thou grievest for those who should not be grieved for; yet thou speakest words of wisdom. The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.

12. Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor these kings. Nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

13. As the soul passes in this body through childhood, youth, and old age, even so is its taking on of another body. The sage is not bewildered by this.

14. The contacts of the senses with the objects of the senses give rise to heat and cold, pleasure and pain. They come and go; they are impermanent. Endure them bravely, O Bharata.

15. That firm man whom, surely, these afflict not, O chief among men, to whom pleasure and pain are the same, is fit for immortality.

16. The unreal never is. The Real never is not. This truth indeed has been seen by those who see the Truth.

17. Know that by which all this is pervaded to be indestructible. No one is able to destroy that Immutable.

18. These bodies of the eternal embodied soul are said to be finite. Therefore fight, O Bharata.

19. He who thinks this to be the slayer and he who thinks this to be the slain — both of them fail to perceive the truth. This neither slays, nor is it slain.

20. It is never born, nor does it die at any time. It has not come into being, does not come into being, and will not come into being. It is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, and primeval. It is not slain when the body is slain.

=== Chapter 18: Moksha Sannyasa Yoga — Liberation Through Renunciation ===

1. Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to know the truth about Sannyasa, and also of Tyaga, O Hrishikesha, O Kesinisudana, separately.

2. The Blessed Lord said: The sages understand Sannyasa to be the giving up of actions prompted by desire; the wise declare the abandonment of the fruits of all actions as Tyaga.

3. Some wise men declare that action should be abandoned as an evil; while others declare that acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned.

4. Hear My conclusion about abandonment, O best of the Bharatas. Abandonment, O best of men, has been explained to be of three kinds.

5. Acts of sacrifice, gift, and austerity should not be abandoned, but should be performed. Sacrifice, gift, and austerity are purifiers of the wise.

6. But even these actions should be performed giving up attachment and the fruits, O Partha; this is My certain and highest view.

64. Hear again My supreme word, the most secret of all. Thou art well-beloved of Me; therefore I will tell thee what is good for thee.

65. Fix thy mind on Me, be devoted to Me, worship Me, bow down to Me. So shalt thou come to Me. I promise thee truly, for thou art dear to Me.

66. Abandoning all duties, come unto Me alone for shelter. I shall liberate thee from all sins; grieve not.

67. This should never be spoken by thee to one who is devoid of austerity, who is not devoted, who does not render service, and who does not desire to listen, and also by one who cavils at Me.

68. He who with supreme devotion to Me will teach this supreme secret among My devotees shall, doubtless, come to Me.